This is the story of the Jewish Catskills of 
which it has been said that it is a thing of  
the past. Or is it? "Smell the air! I'll smell it... 
you satisfied?" It's true that the Jewish Catskills
which was so romanticized in pop culture with 
television shows like 'The Marvelous Mrs. Masel'
"Up here in the mountains I do different kinds of things..." or the classic romcom 'Dirty Dancing', that  
world has disappeared. And while that's in a way 
true, the Catskill Mountains in Upstate New York  
is a Jewish Hub still. A very different Jewish Hub.
Today it's a summering place for Hasidic Jews. I was  

raised in the Hasidic community and later left the fold. 
When I look at the story of the Jewish Catskills I  

wonder about preservation of Jewish Community.
Why is one type of Jewish community alive and  

another a thing of the past? And what does it 
mean to me, someone who's made such profound  

changes in my life, about the value of change 
versus stasis, preservation versus assimilation?

In this video, I take a trip to the beautiful 
Catskills Mountains for a journey into the past  

into some existential questions and of course,
to some wonderful fresh air. It's sweltering and

empty here in Hasidic Williamsburg, Brooklyn, New 
York City. This normally bustling neighborhood  

is asleep during the summer months of July 
and August. Many people take their whole large  

family of 6, 8, 10 children and go 100 miles north 
to the Caskill Mountains, or as it's called by Hasidim:

to The Country. I'm making the trip too. One of my 
rare video projects that take me out of my beloved  

City. The neighborhood we leave behind is very 
quiet. Many people are away. They've already left  

weeks ago, on a designated day at the end of June. 
I was here on the day they left. This is what it  

looked like: a mass Exodus from Egypt. On the Hasidic
social media this clip is posted around with well  

wishes for a healthy summer. The actual 
scene of leaving is not this crazy, but people like  

to joke about it. It captures the spirit. After 
everyone left, the neighborhood was quiet. Many  

shops closed for the summer or for weekends. For 
years I've watched the neighborhood empty out for  

summer. Now, for the first time, I'm going to see 
where everyone goes off to. On my way I make a stop  

into my past. I'm driving to the Village of Kiryas
Joel 60 miles north. This town is a Hasidic community  

for the Satmar Sect. It is even more insular than the 
Williamsburg Hasidic Community. My parents moved out  

here from Williamsburg before I was born. This is 
where I grew up. This is where I was raised, married,  

had my child, and called my home for the first 25 
years of my life. This is truly an astounding place:

called a theocracy within a democracy, I grew up 
with a Hasidic mayor and government, with streets  

named after Hasidic cities in Eastern Europe, like 
Satmar and Siget and Lizensk. This is my childhood  

Street Satmar Drive, where I spent many Summers 
'bordering', the Yiddish word for being a wild-child. Hot,  

sticky, fun, summers outside. Here I was raised with 
sheltered innocence yet with a strong palpable  

awareness of the Holocaust. My grandparents 
were all survivors. Everyone's Grandparents were  

survivors. They told a lot of terrifying stories 
of miraculous survival, we breathed in its legacy,

it was in the air dense with a memory of the 
near annihilation of our people. For our pious  

elders the lesson of the Holocaust was that Jews 
must keep fighting for our survival after such a  

long history of persecution. For us, their children 
and grandchildren, this meant not to assimilate.

Often with would hear the refrain: I didn't survive 
Hitler so my children could become goyim, Gentiles.

This meant that we were not to change our 
language from Yiddish, not to change from our  

traditional dress, not to bring in secular culture, 
television or entertainment, not to go to college.  

We learned that the Jews who opened themselves 
up spiritually to the secular world, even if they  

tried to continue to stay deeply Jewish, they 
lost their Jewish identity. I understood in a  

way that really affected me that the lesson was 
that you can't have it both ways: you can't have  

rich Jewish culture and also assimilate. Look: 
my grandparents would say of Americanized Jews,  

they wanted to be American... "New York is awesome!" 
They wanted the best of both worlds. They lost  

their Jewish World in the process. The second 
generation lost Jewish culture, and by the third  

many intermarried. Communities fell apart, and look 
where the world of American Jewish is. I carry these  

messages with me in a deep crevice of my soul, This 
is one of the strongest internal conflicts of my  

life. I don't think about God, faith and religion 
in terms of where I come from. I think about what  

it means to survive. I take these conflicts 
onward to Route 17. We're going to [Music]

hitchike... Further up north we go deeper into the past. To 
the story of the Jews who did, indeed, Americanize.

I'm in the Borscht Belt Museum. I'm transported into 
a world of old luxury... of images of bare skin and  

romance, of women singing and naughty jokes. Two 
old Jewish guys are in Miami Beach and they're  

sitting there and one says to the other: You 
know Sam, I can tell you exactly how old you  

are, right to the day. He says, That's impossible! 
I'll prove it to you. Take your T-shirt off and  

he's looking at him, he's looking at him. He says: I 
need more information. What do you need? Drop your  

trunks. I can't drop my trunks! We're on the beach! 
you're an Alte Kaker, nobody cares about you. You're an  

old guy. All right, he drops his trunks. He looks at 
him - he says: You were born on May 17th of 1939. He says:

Oh my gosh, how are you able to do that? Schmuck, 
you told me yesterday! My guide is Alan Frishman. He  

takes me through a remarkable story of what once 
was. This is the world I was sheltered from that, I  

never knew. The Borsht Belt began in the 1920s with 
humble starts. Jews, often immigrants or children of  

immigrants, Yiddish speakers who aspired to Make 
It in America, lived in overcrowded tenements in  

Manhattan and the summers were very unforgiving.
But Jews were often not allowed into the Catskill  

Resorts and so they made their own hotels and 
Bungalow colonies. These were not colonies formed  

for religious isolation, but colonies formed 
an aspiration that Jews too could one day be  

equals in America. It started rather humbly with 
little rickety Bungalows built around a communal

house but these spaces became incubators of 
talent, a place of great creative energy, a real  

moment in history. As many worked hard to fulfill 
the American dream, the communities exploded with  

talent, grit, dark humor, the relishing of all 
great things America had to offer. "Alan King's  

entire routine consisted of simply reading the 
obituaries and the punchline was 'survived by his  

wife' Many young Jews got their start here in life, 
working in large hotels, cobbling together enough  

money to go to college for a better life. This was 
the crux of the great successful Jewish American  

assimilation story. The entertainment was the 
origin for great stars, Standup comedy was born  

here. Yiddish Music, theater, dance thrived. Here was the 
famous Grossinger Hotel with its own airport and its  

Stars. Here was the famous Kutcher Resort, or the 
Raleigh... Simon says this is before eating at the  

Raleigh, Simon Says this is this after. One reporter wrote 
a piece calling the Jewish Catskills the Borscht

Belt, for the traditional Ukrainian or Russian soup 
that many of these Jews of Eastern European origin  

enjoyed at the resorts, and the name stuck. It was 
also called, then as now, The Country. But the Borscht

Belt began its precipitous decline in the' 60s, 
definitely by the' 70s people stopped coming. They  

could now fly farther, to newer places, and as fewer 
people came, facilities could not afford to stay  

open. Some closed, hauntingly staying in their 
abandoned state for years. There were places  

that fought to the bitter end not to close. During 
this chapter the Four Seasons Lodge was a bungalow  

colony of Holocaust Survivors who all spoke 
Yiddish and knew what it was like to have lived  

through that dark chapter of history. But their 
children didn't come, and grandchildren didn't either. In  

the beautiful documentary 'The Four Season's Lodge' we 
see these elderly folks eke out a few more years  

before this too finally closed. Did this glorious 
chapter end because of, like my grandparents warned,  

assimilation? Because of how untenable assimilation 
makes to the cohesion of Jewish Community? Alan  

bristles when I say the Catskills died. But 
he then concedes that a number of A's have  

led to this decline. Airplanes, automobiles 
air condition, and assimilation. Ah yes, we  

who want better for our kids! It's my own story 
too. My son was born in the Hasidic Community he  

spoke Yiddish and once wore sidelocks. He's now 
College bound. My parents shunned college. But like  

the folks of the Borscht Belt, my life has been 
hard. I didn't fit into that world. I found it  

often stifling. I didn't connect to the faith 
of this world, to the harshness of its social  

pressures, to the sharply gendered roles. I left 
because, like Allan said, this life was hard for  

me. I was hoping for better things for myself and 
for my little family. But as my grandparents warned,  

wanting better things comes with a steep price.
Here in the Catskills wanting better things was  

part of what ended such a great era in Jewish 
American life. Could it be that we parents want  

so badly to give our children what we didn't 
have that we forget to give them what we did?  

Was this end a sad loss of a world that should 
have continued on, or was it simply the natural  

end of a very very special chapter? I also have 
memories of times up here. They're very different.  

My family never summered in the mountains. But 
I spent many summers farther up north in Satmar

girls' summer camp. That was wild and fun and crazy 
and boring and sweltering. We were all girls plotting  

pranks without ever knowing what the word pranks 
meant. Every year I packed up a bunch of masks and  

crazy costumes as part of my arsenal of stuff for 
summer camp. By day two I'd be out of a voice, calling  

home from the pay phone and sending regards 
like a croaking frog, begging for a nosh-box to  

be shipped to me with licorice. In summer camp we 
all believe that licorice made you hyper, a kind  

of primitive view of drugs. And when I think back, I 
remember military-style barracks, sagging mattresses,  

neglected hygiene, and reams of long Twizzlers 
which we ate like teens might drink alcohol. 

This might sound wildly fun but clearly, I'm not 
the only one who wanted better, because today's Hasidic 

summer camps, based on their promotional material, 
are certainly trying to do better for the children

with plays and petting zoos and sports enactments 
of the Bible and air condition. Things are changing,  

always, even if we don't want to admit it. But there 
are different kinds of changes. What Hasidic Bungalow  

colonies look like is still a very distinct 
story. I come to Monticello for the Hasidic Bungalow  

Colonies. There are many hubs of colonies, but 
the town of Monticello is one of the biggest ones.

It's a very closed world here and I feel myself 
largely on the outside of the cluster of colonies.

Each colony is fenced off and filled with children, 
women hanging laundry and talking on the phone,  

sitting around in a coffee klatch and socializing, 
entertaining visitors. It's a very communal space  

even more communal than in Brooklyn, with little 
privacy and everyone in each other's business. If  

the Catskills were once famous for entertainment, 
food, and romance... I'd say they are now famous for:  

young families, chatting and swimming. Every colony 
has a pool that's fenced off with a tall wall and  

the entrance has two doors so no woman is exposed 
while swimmers come and go. The children seem to  

spend all day in their swimming robes, their 
special modest swimsuit called the Shvim Kleid  

ready for their next splash underneath. I remember 
spending much of my own childhood summers wearing  

one myself. In the Hasidic Catskills the women are 
here all week with the children but the husbands  

only come up during the weekend, staying in the 
city during the week to work. Traffic on Friday is  

bumper to bumper, as men drive up. The colonies look 
very different on a weekend day than on a weekday.

During the week the colonies are intense spaces of 
female friendship and caring for children. This has  

been going on for many years. My dear friend Pearl 
remembers being here as a child overhearing the  

cries of the women who survived the war. Today it 
feels so different with some of the young ladies  

the fourth generation from the Holocaust, raised in 
a much less post-traumatic world. But the women-  

centeredness - that remains. How do they pass the 
time? Probably chat, gossip, laugh, feel bored, swim.

At a family wedding, I asked a relative how she 
passes the time in The Country. She has eight  

children. None of them spend their time in front 
of screens. And yet her answer to me was this: I do  

nothing and I love it! It's not the kind of thing 
I like. The country is too much extroversion, too  

much socializing, but I admire the way in which 
the collective takes care of the kids, in which  

the women live the refrain 'it takes a village.' I stroll around the country roads for many hours  

doing nothing to quite liking it actually. The air
is amazing. Hasidic couples go on little intimate  

walks, women go brisk walking for exercise, I pass 
yeshivas where men sit facing the road, peering  

over books in prayer and study. Male spaces feel 
even more intimidating to me, and yet the sight 

reminds me of my grandfather on summer days. It's 
lovely. I pass school programs for kids involved  

in all sorts of joy rides, and of course there 
are children everywhere with their iconic icee,  

here called the Foxy Pop. I don't feel comfortable 
entering any of these clusters. I am an outsider  

to them. That's their charm and that's their turn 
off. There's a lot of mistrust among Hasidim towards  

outsiders and it took me many years to build the 
kind of trust I have in Williamsburg and Boro Park. I  

am here for just a few days and I feel entirely an 
outsider. But there's a great, central shopping mall  

and that is a lot more open. I head over there. This is where people come walking or driving  

from their bubbles of their Bungalow colonies to 
buy stuff. To buy kosher food, to use the kosher  

internet, to buy Judaica, and of course baked goods. I 
guess when you get tired of loving to do nothing,  

you come here. At Oneg's the proprietor who knows me 
from Williamsburg tells me about a major fire that  

is raging in Williamsburg on Le Avenue as we speak.
There's your harmless dose of gossip. I instantly  

feel the warm embrace of an insider and it's 
lovely. I'm also gifted with pastries like this  

modest gingerbread lady with a skirt. She tastes of 
chocolate and rum she's maybe a little better to  

look at than to eat. There are filtered computer 
kiosks, and Laser Games, Judaica and modest clothing,  

there are pickles and pastrami poppers, but we 
have no luck finding Borscht. In that sense, it  

seems, the Borscht Belt is truly history. I'm staying 
in an Airbnb Bungalow. A very different space. A new  

incarnation of the little un-winterized hut. Welcome, we're staying in this lovely Bungalow,  

in a bungalow Colony it's not Hasidic. But all these 
little Bungalows are being rented. I love it. I'm  

very happy here. We have a full fridge which I'm not 
sure what I would do with since I don't even cook  

much at home, bedroom and the bathroom. It's tiny. In 
this Colony there are no scattered children's toys,  

or any children at all, and the Seesaw is rusted.
The pool isn't closed off with a wood partition.  

Little tiny immodest bathing suits hang from the 
lines. The woman next door to me graciously shares  

with me stories about her experience here, and 
about her plentiful fishing catch which she fished  

at the nearby lake all by herself. It's a bass, what 
else did you get? Yeah, this is bass, bass Sunfish and  

that's it... Very nice! I have a terrific time getting 
kosher dinners in the shopping center and spending  

hours at the lake soaking in the beautiful 
nature and the quiet and the peacefulness of just  

the few of us here as my soul craves it. I read and 
play games with my travel companion. I spend some  

time working, booking walking tours and speaking 
engagements, some with Jewish groups - the clients  

are Jewish groups of summer camps and synagogues 
that are not Orthodox, that are related to the  

generation of Jews who opened themselves up to 
assimilation. I love to meet these groups, to listen  

to the ways in which they seek to grapple with a 
Jewish question of broadening versus closing down,  

in the ways in which they seek to find Jewishness 
outside of closed religiosity. When I speak to  

them I learn that they don't share the view that 
all is lost with change. They find new ways for  

community, religion, faith, meaning. I like to think 
that I too find new ways of Jewishness that works  

for me. Ultimately I so appreciate that the Hasidic
world exists and I'm so grateful that I had the  

opportunity to leave it because it wasn't for me. 
There's a reason I left. A reason so many before  

me sought something different. They loved it but it 
was small and insular for them. I recall how Allen

described how hard the work in the colony was for 
him. While he lives the beautiful memories of what  

was, unlike my grandparents, he does not see its 
end as a regrettable loss. Sometimes it's time to  
move on. I relate to that. I respect that others 
see it differently. I'm also very grateful that  
I get to come back as my new self for brief, 
satisfying, delicious visits. When I left my  
community at 25, heartbroken and lonely, afraid of 
losing custody and terrified of building a new  
life as an island in the world, I could have never 
expected this. This generosity and friendliness of  
the Hasidim who know me is an invigorating trip 
back home, even as it comes with bittersweet  
feelings. Maybe the older generation was more 
either/or, you're in or you're out, you can't  
come back. Maybe some things profoundly changed 
after all. Change happens everywhere. Stasis is  
a myth. The community too, here is changing, 
even as it holds on to the Catskills and
thrives. Before I leave the Hasidic Monticello
area I get one last infusion of delicious  
food at a kosher bakery. I am told I must 
try the babka milkshake. This drink, if I can  
say so, represents everything I've learned 
here, neatly packaged in a plastic cup, with  
a straw, with a cherry, I mean a rugula, 
on top. It's a fusion of the old and the  
new. The chocolate babka of tradition, and the 
milkshake of the new. The drink tastes like  
new world with a kick of old world. It's 
very sweet I love it in a small dose. It  
leaves a lovely taste in my mouth as I head 
back home, many thoughts swirling in my head

 

[Music]


